---
sidebar_position: 5
title: Project Team
---

One of the Project Manager's responsibilities is to ensure they have the proper team with the proper skills to execute the project. Whether the Project Manager is provided the ability to interview and select their team or their team is provided to them by Senior Management, it is still the Project Manager's responsibility to ensure they have all the necessary resources to be successful. This means ensuring they have the right team assembled to complete the work.

# Assembling a Project Team

When deciding on the project team, the Project Manager must consider many elements of the project. The primary elements that a Project Manager must consider about their team are:

The location of the team. The size of the team, including number of resources and the skills needed, both technical and interpersonal. Considerations about the location of the team members have to do with the goals and objectives of the project If the project is a global project, then the team will likely have members from multiple physical locations.
**A team that is separated across multiple locations is called a virtual team.**
Virtual teams provide the ability to locate team members close to Stakeholders or customers and also to incorporate necessary geographical requirements, if needed. However, virtual teams are much more difficult to lead as the physical distance and lack of daily face-to-face contact makes establishing trust among the team more of a challenge. Co-located teams, or teams that work in the same location on a daily basis tend to be more productive and effective as they have more freedom in communication and can establish stronger relationship bonds.

In today's global economy, many companies are working across country boundaries to deliver their products and services, and as such, so must the Project Manager. Many Project Managers assume that they can manage a virtual project with the same techniques as they manage a co-located team but this will surely lead to disaster.

Project Managers must realize that the complexity of the project increases dramatically if executed in a virtual team environment compared to a similarly scoped project that is executed in a co-located environment. If the Project Manager does not plan for this in advance and ensure proper mechanisms for communication, team building, and sharing project information, then they will encounter severe challenges. In the virtual project, assuming that technology conquers all country boundaries is another route to failure. Email, texting, instant messaging they are all wonderful time savers, but killers in a virtual project. The Project Manager must take extra steps to ensure clear and consistent communications in a variety of forms the best form is some sort of face-to face-interaction whether it be via video conference or the occasional face-to-face meeting of the Project Manager and team. Virtual teams also benefit from clear structure organizationally as well as project based.

Organizationally, clearly defining roles and responsibilities and ensuring all project team members understand the project objective and their role in achieving the objective is key. Also providing an easy mechanism to share project information via shared knowledge repositories can be a great asset. And lastly, the Project Manager must learn and understand the expectations of behaviour in various cultures. The size of a team can have implications on its effectiveness. A smaller team comprised of individuals that can work full time on the project will be far more efficient than a larger team of individuals only working part time on your project. Sometimes part time personnel are needed on a project, however, where possible, full time resources can create a more collaborative and strengthened team. The Project Manager must select the right resources to get the work done.

An accountant can’t perform the work of a plumber, for example. Often times, Project Managers will have a choice of resources with various skill levels and experience. It is important to recognize when the expert may be needed on a critical portion of the project, and when a more junior resource will serve well doing more routine or known portions of the project work. In this way, the Project Manager can find a balance on the team that match the goals, objectives, and challenges of the project. It would be wonderful to have a team full of experts to help you deliver your project; however, experts usually cost more money. So, the Project Manager must also balance the skill and experience of the team with the budget available. Technical skills are not the only skills that a Project Manager should seek in their team members. The ability to work well with others, to collaborate, to communicate effectively, and to be a team player are all very necessary skills. You could have the most experienced and skilled person on your team to perform work, but if they can’t communicate or work well with the rest of the team, then conflicts and problems will arise. Once a project team is identified, the Project Manager’s job is not done. Throughout the life of the project, the Project Manager must skilfully guide the team to a successful delivery of the objectives. This is more than just a matter of assigning work. A team is a powerful concept when it works well together. However, if the team is in conflict or chaos, the entire project will suffer. It is the job of the Project Manager to provide a team environment that promotes communication, trust, and collaboration.
